I mean, do you want me to start, you know... You're talking to Victor Burch, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, how I got started.
Well, let's start, let me start with a question.
I remember the first time you and I met, it's got to be six years ago, you gave me a card that said, Victor Burch, literary detective.
Right.
Do you still have that card?
Do you still consider yourself... I still have that card.
I still do literary detection on a pretty refined basis.
Can you tell me what a literary detective is?
Well, a literary detective is really one who uncovers literary works that either are anonymous, are pseudonymous, lost forever.
Not really once I find them.
So that's the sort of thing I enjoy doing.
That's really the fun of it, you know.
I don't know if you...
No, a book that came out about Louisa May Alcott within the past year or so of nine stories that were recently discovered.
And I was the one that uncovered them.
All nine?
All nine.
Tell me about that.
Well, I have been in contact with Madeline Stern.
She's the expert.
She's the expert on Louisa May Alcott.
I'm just checking my speed here.
That's all.
You just keep going.
You just keep talking.
And, you know, we had, you know, exchange letters and stuff like that.
And one time I just, you know, figured, well, I went through one of her bibliographies and there were things there that they couldn't find, you know.
They said she had written them, you know, but they didn't know where.
And how did they know about them?
Well, they were in her day book, you know.
I see.
In her, you know, record keeping book.
And I figured I would go through the record keeping book and just, you know, make sure that these were the ones that were not known.
And I decided that, you know, the best way to tackle this would be to go through every periodical
that was published by her publisher at the time, and that was Frank Leslie.
Now, where did you find these?
You must have gone to AAS or whatever?
Well, yeah, I went, you know, to AAS, BPL, or wherever they had them, you know, and I went through all of them, and some of them matched up, no, the actual volumes.
Some of them matched up, some of them didn't match up, but I had to read, you know, the text because sometimes
She maybe didn't remember, or the publisher may have changed the title slightly.
So, therefore, you know, by reading through the text, I figured this was the one that she wrote.
Now, were these pseudonymously published?
Anonymously.
Anonymously published.
So, how are you making the... So, really, what you have to do then is check the text that's published.
Once the title matched, I didn't care, you know, because the title matched.
But if it didn't match, then, you know, sometimes the title would have, you know, the person's name that was in the story.
Then I would read the story and I'd say, oh, this is about that person.
So are you doing textual analysis here?
No, I don't.
No, that's not my forte.
Okay.
Now, is this something you do as a hobby, or do you get complicated for this?
Well, I mean, you know, maybe I get a copy of the book, signed, or something like that.
I mean, you know, I figure I've gotten...
enough out of the system that it's time to pay back.
Tell me a little bit about that.
Do you want to go back to my roots?
Let's proceed as if that first interview we had didn't exist, because I took notes that day, and I'd like to make this a fresh interview.
If you don't mind, if you've got the time.
All right.
I can give you my background.
Okay.
I grew up in the Roxbury
Dorchester, Mattapan area, and I attended, you know, one of the most prestigious high schools in the country was, you know, Boston Latin School.
There I got my language background, and I got to be pretty good in, you know, quite a few languages.
And, but all the time, you know, I, you know, just a young boy growing up, and I became interested in
like science fiction at the time.
As a reader?
As a reader, yeah, as a reader and a collector, too, you know.
I mean, I made a business of just trying to collect everything that was, all the magazines about science fiction that were published.
And at the time, you know, I would like, you know, work after school, and I would get, you know, maybe like five dollars a week.
Out of that five dollars, half of it went to my mother, and part of it went to my car fair to get to school.
Part of it went to, you know, maybe a lunch or two, something like that.
And whatever was left at the end of the week was maybe 25 cents or something like that.
When I got a dollar, I would go into Boston and go scouring through all the old news bookshops for all the magazines that I wanted to add to my collection.
The magazines you were really looking for.
Right, because they were the ones that really, you know, pushed science fiction.
Any favorites of things?
Do you remember any of the things?
Yeah, you know, I read a lot of astounding and amazing stories.
And then there were, you know, some adventure-type science fiction-y sort of things, like Operator 5, or G8 and his battle aces, that had, you know, elements of fantasy in them, you know.
Now, give you an idea of when this was.
This was like in, let's see, probably, I was about 12 at the time, probably 1936.
So, roughly 1924.
That's when I was born.
So, you were about... I'm 70.
I'm going to be 72.
So, you know, with that sort of, you know, once I had that dollar, I would go in and blow it.
Then I became interested in...
the languages of the Near East, which meant, you know, the older languages.
Not only Hebrew, but Tunei form, you know, Babylonian.
Then I got interested in Egyptian hieroglyphics.
Did you have any expectation at this point that you'd be a scholar?
No, none.
I mean, I knew that I would never go to college.
Why did you know that?
Well, my parents were poor.
They didn't have the money.
And my father was just an ordinary working man.
And he couldn't afford to do it.
And then, you know... Were you an only child?
No, I had three own assistants.
Were your parents immigrants?
No.
But my father was.
From where?
He came from Russia.
To Wisconsin.
A draft.
Whatever.
Yeah, well, I mean, they all did, you know.
Is bridge your original name?
No.
It was changed, but I think I've tracked down what the origin was.
Did your father use bridge?
Yeah.
He at one time was a bridge at one time before the crash came.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
And he was in like the real estate business.
In Boston?
In Boston.
He like built up, him and his brother built up like
all those big apartment houses that are next to the museum.
Oh, yeah.
Well, that's nice.
They owned all those.
Really?
And when the crash came, Zippo.
It went, bye-bye.
So, you know.
So, you're talking about the Depression now, basically.
Right.
You know, wandering.
Right, yeah.
And, well, in Boston Latin School, I really became interested in languages.
And that just kind of stayed with me, even in the service, you know.
I always carried a bunch of books with me.
Now, you were in the Navy, I think.
Well, I was in the Merchant Marine for four years and in the Army after that for five years.
Getting out of the Army when?
Either the late 40s.
So you were in the war?
Well, I was in the war, yeah.
The Merchant Marine.
The Merchant Marine, mostly in the Merchant.
I went into the Army before.
Well, yeah, I was overseas, you know, with the Merchant Marine.
But, when, as the war was winding down is when I went into the Army, because I figured, you know, the Merchant Marine were not going to get any benefits.
The Army would.
So, I went into the Army, and I spent five years there.
But interestingly enough, one of my first jobs in there was working in a library.
Fortuitous, huh?
Well, it may have been, but it wasn't anything, you know.
It took a great amount of brains.
It was like removing the checkout slips.
Like what I saw these guys doing this morning at the depository, big kites and putting things away.
Well, I mean, we weren't putting things away.
We were just taking, you know, they used to have a,
slip in there when you checked out the book, you know, it would be dated.
I guess this stuff didn't circulate anymore, and it was just taking that stuff out of there, you know.
But that was my, you know, my biggest experience with the library.
But, you know, I was a voracious reader as a kid, you know.
I think when I was about maybe ten years old, I remember going
to the American Public Library and ordering that they should get for me from the Boston Public Library, BOP's Comparative Grammar of the Indo-European Languages.
B-O-P-P-BOP.
B-O-P-P-BOP, yeah.
BOP's Comparative Grammar of the Indo-European Languages, which sort of, you know, brought, you know, all the languages that they were, you know, really derived
from the common source.
It's always intrigued me, you know, this common source business, you know.
Are you into symbiotics at all?
No.
Umberto Hecco recently wrote a book about an original language that may be a common source of what you talked, you know, that you're alluding to.
Maybe.
Uh, but, uh, it always fascinated me, you know, where mankind really started, you know, and what did he speak.
So, you know, we got them talking, going back to the caveman days.
Sure.
But at any rate, you know, so that really got me interested in the languages of the Near East.
And I always, you know, was very, you know, studious about the whole thing, you know.
I just learned it on my own.
What do you call it?
Didactism or something like that.
I could learn myself that I had a fairly good memory, so that kind of helped, too.
This was in the years immediately following the war.
No, I was interested in it before.
But I mean what you're talking about now.
You get out of the Army after five years, I think.
I got out of the Army, and then I went to work for my father, who had bought a small delicatessen or something like that.
And I worked for him God knows how many years, you know.
And I think he sold the business.
Where are we now, in the 40s or the 50s?
We're probably in the 50s now.
He sold the business, and later one of my friends bought the business, and I went in with him.
So you worked at this for some time?
Yeah.
At the deli?
Right.
What was the name of the deli?
Eli's Deli.
Where was it?
It was in Mattapan.
A well-known deli?
Huh?
Was it a well-known deli?
They make sandwiches or just sell stuff over there?
Everything.
So, at any rate, I had really become interested in this newly discovered decipherment of Linear A and Linear B.
I love the image of a man working at a deli being fascinated by the decipherment of linear A. Do you know what it is?
Yeah, sure.
It's a hieroglyphic.
Well, it was from Cleet, from Cleet, from the Island of Cleet.
And supposedly in, you know, Greek style.
I'm a good Greek, you see.
Oh, that's okay.
I don't speak any, but... Well, I do.
I mean, I can read it, speak it.
How many languages do you figure your fluent in?
Well, I can get by in probably about 16.
Very good.
Wow.
Self-taught knowledge?
Well, it's either self-taught or, you know, like I learned to read Russian because I learned the Greek alphabet.
But once you can read it, then you can use a dictionary.
And once you can use a dictionary, you notice what terms, you know, well, right now I'm dealing with, you know, military aspects.
So, you know, all the
All the military terms in the Slavic languages tend to be the same.
Military what?
History?
Well, right now I'm the activist of a group of Americans that volunteered to fight in Spain in 1936 and 1939, which was known as the Abraham Lincoln Brigade.
I know the Abraham Lincoln Brigade.
Quite a few Greeks went there.
That's right.
Very well known.
Right.
So I'm the activist.
And these people, now this is the archivist for people who still survive from this, is that?
Well, yeah, the organization, they have a veterans organization, that still survives.
And that's based where?
That's, well, the veterans are based in New York, but this is an organization that is made up mostly of academics who want to preserve that history.
And it was, you know, formed at Brandeis.
That's where I operate.
So let's go back then to your fascination for linear B. Linear A. Linear A, I'm sorry.
So, you know, with that fascination, when I wasn't working, I would go to, you know, some lectures given by one of the foremost scholars at Brandeis on that.
I didn't go to Brandeis.
You're probably in your 30s now.
I'm a late bloomer.
So am I. My first book was published when I was 52.
I didn't learn how to drive until I was 55.
My wife became disabled, and it was just a matter of survival.
Uh, so I went to listen, you know, listen to a couple of his lectures and— Whose lectures?
Did you name him?
Professor Cyrus Gordon.
Okay.
The scholar in Eucharitic, which is another Near Eastern language.
And he became fascinated with Linear A and Linear B, and also the Festus Disc.
And the Festus Disc was this, like a wheel that was, it had pictographs on it.
And it was found on one of those Greek islands.
How do you spell Festus?
P-H-A-I-S-T-O-S.
Oh, look at that.
Yeah.
And it was found on one of the islands?
On one of the Creighton islands, yeah.
And what about it?
And it was, you know, it had a, it was written in pictographs.
And, you know, he'd been trying to decipher that.
So, you know, I just lent, you know, some of my humble expertise, and he looked at me, you know.
So you volunteered?
You went on this after election?
Yeah, after election, I went out and I stopped talking to him.
And he says to me, together, going, I think, you know, going to school.
He asked you if you'd ever thought of going to school?
Right, you know, going to college.
I said, yeah, I thought about it.
My father couldn't afford it, you know.
So he says, well, Brandeis, you know, has a program whereby
they will acknowledge, you know, previous learning, even after your own, and they will give you credit towards it, you know.
And this is Brandeis at its very earliest stages.
Right.
I mean, it was established in... Established in 1948.
Yeah, so this is within ten years of its formation, right?
Right, right.
And this gentleman, Dr. Gordon... Cyrus Gordon.
...is teaching there.
Right.
And so you introduced yourself to him.
He was impressed by your...
By my, yeah, by my knowledge, yeah.
And, you know, maybe at the time, you know, I may be the only one of those students that understood what he was talking about, you know.
And he says, well, we do have a program, you know, where we recognize, you know, this autodidactiveness, you know, and we can, you know, see if we can get you in here, you know.
I said, well, I couldn't go except on a part-time basis.
He says, that's okay, you know.
So he, you know, expedited it, and I got in there.
And this is at an undergraduate level or graduate level?
What level did you get in?
I have no bachelor's degree, but I went there to get a master's.
Really?
Right.
Isn't that wonderful?
Yeah.
So they kind of gave you credit for... Right.
Now did you have to take any tests, or was this... The only test I think I had to take was at the end was a French...
languages then to see, you know.
Isn't that great?
Yeah.
So you were awarded the Masters?
And what year was that?
That was in 1966.
1966.
After how many years of studying were it?
Well, let's say 42 years.
No, maybe 30 years of studying.
No, I mean... Oh, you mean there?
Formal study.
There?
I think I went three or four years, I think.
Three or four years?
Yeah, part-time.
And what was the degree in?
Well, it was in, at that time, they gave, you know, degrees in what's called Near Eastern Studies.
So it was a master's, an MA?
Yeah, in Near Eastern, but I specialized in Egyptian higher levels.
And did you write a paper, a dissertation?
Didn't have to write a paper, just took my competency exam to see that I knew what the language was about.
So this is 1966, so you're about 44 now.
Right.
So I, right away, you know, I graduate.
And I said, what the hell am I going to do now?
I got an M.A.
I'm working in a deli.
And, you know, gee, I've got to do something.
I've got a master's degree, you know.
So a lot of my friends were working at the library, you know, for the summer.
BPL?
At the BPL?
Yeah, at Brandeis.
For the summer, you know.
So I said, maybe I'll go over there, you know, and inquire.
Maybe I can work here in the summer.
It's a part-time job.
And I went there, you know, and...
I spoke to the person who was the acting director then.
They didn't have a full-time director.
And in the meantime... At the library?
Yeah.
Prior to all this, you know, like maybe after World War II had ended, I did a lot of book scouting for George Gloss, who was, you know, the Brattle Bookshops.
I was just here the other day.
The Globe was doing a piece on me.
Oh, yeah?
And we took a shot down at the Brattle.
Right.
And his son, Kenny, is running the place.
So, you know, I used to, you know, do some book scouting for him.
I'm going to ask you about this.
I'm doing another book for Holt.
I'm doing two books.
One is going to be on book hunting.
Oh, okay.
Tips for the beginners.
Maybe you can give me some ideas about book scouting.
I'm going to circle this here.
We'll come back to it, all right?
Okay.
So you were out picking, so to speak?
Yeah, right.
And I figured out what's the best way to learn the kind of things that people are looking for.
So I got a hold of, oh, what the heck, the guy that wrote the book on Americana.
The name escapes me.
Massachusetts guy?
No, no.
Not Frank Streeter, the great collector.
No, no, no, no, no.
He was a collector.
This guy was, he wrote... No, I mean Tom Streeter, not Frank Streeter.
Right.
Frank Streeter.
So, you know, I just started to look that over, you know, and he would give, you know, like he would mark something A, D, C, D, you know, according to what value, you know, he might have.
And I just looked that over.
I got to know Americana pretty good.
After, you know,
reading it for maybe six times, just familiarizing myself with it.
So, when I went to speak to the guy at the library, you know, he asked me, you know, what did I know about librarians?
You go there, you take books, and you read them.
But, you know, he was kind of impressed with my knowledge of Americana.
He said, you know, Brandeis is looking for a rare book librarian.
I mean, this is like, you know, being in the right place at the right time.
Who's this you're talking to again, though?
He was the acting director.
Do you know his name?
Oh, God, it was on the tip of my tongue.
Tarlin, Mr. Tarlin.
Tarlin?
Yeah, T-A-R-L-I-N.
Okay.
So he advised you that the rare books... Well, that the Brandeis was what I, you know, like to...
considered the job."
I said, yeah.
Have they ever had one at that point?
No.
So they were at this point deciding that they're going to form a special collections division.
Right.
And they needed somebody to head it up.
He said, but you've got to promise me one thing.
I said, what's that?
He said, you have to go get another master's degree in library science.
Where'd you do this?
Simmons?
Yeah, yeah.
So I did.
And I went through that part to it.
So did you get the job?
prior to this?
Well, they were, like, simultaneously.
How long did it take you to get the second Master's?
I think three years.
And is this an MS or an MA?
It's an MS.
In Library Science.
Right.
MSLS.
MSLS, that's what it is?
I think that's it.
So you have two Master's.
Right.
Did you keep going?
Anything after that?
No.
Were you protected by the PhD?
So, you became Director of Special Collectors?
Well, I became, well, I don't know if they had a name for it then, but I became the head of Special Collectors.
And then, you know, while you're there, you know, you're constantly learning, you know, because working in a library is, you know, educating yourself every single minute.
And I believe in that, you know, that people should educate themselves as long as they're alive.
And, and so, let's get a date on this.
When did you become, assume this job at Brandeis, of the rare books?
Well, let's see.
It's probably about 10 years since I was out of Brandeis, as that.
So, that's 66, 76.
And I was there 20...it was probably 67.
So, 67 to 87 you had this?
22 years, yeah.
So, to 89?
Yeah.
So it was 67 to 89.
Something like that.
Approximately.
I can't remember.
But it was 22 years.
Yeah.
And then, you know, I tried to, you know... This I don't want to go in the book.
Okay.
Administrators know shit about books.
They know how to administrate, but when it comes to books...
They don't know anything, you know.
So, were you an administrator?
No.
I mean, not really, you know.
I didn't have any staff.
So, this was a fledgling collection.
Right, yeah.
Did you acquire for them, or did you basically take care of stuff that they had?
I did, yeah.
I was given a small budget, you know, to buy things.
What kind of materials did you have at that point?
Well, they had gotten an awful lot of contribution, you know.
New School opening up for the Jewish communities.
A lot of people who were book collectors, you know, gave their collections.
So, they had, you know, a fairly amount of valuable material.
Would you characterize it as really good material, useful material that supported the curriculum?
Well, the library really didn't have a direction in which to go, you know.
Did you try to establish one for them?
Well, I felt that was up to the director, you know.
to really initiate something like that, you know.
It was at the point there, you know, where one faculty member said this, and another one was interested in his own thing.
No, you know how it is, you know.
It gets political, you know.
So, you know, what did happen was that, you know, we did focus on this Spanish Civil War thing.
The History Department bought a small collection
And they asked the library if they would like to develop it.
And it was given to me to develop.
And I developed it to where it's now one of the most outstanding collections in the country.
And how do you go about developing a collection like that?
Well, first of all, you try to get, you know, first of all, you've got to look at bibliographies.
And then you've got to try to buy as many books on that subject as you can.
Are you looking for books or primary materials or both, manuscripts, everything, right?
Well, yeah.
And then, you know, after a while, my really interest really became intrigued in that because at that particular period of time, people who were writing, you know, political material were never using their right name.
And that intrigued me also.
Who were these people that were writing?
So this may even have been...
the beginning of this, what became this fascination for literary detection, is that right?
Can you give me a couple of examples of people who maybe rode under Sudan?
Most of them were Spanish, you know, although, you know, some of the ones in the United States, their names became pretty well known, you know, after a while, but you'd have to dig them out in, you know, political
and stuff like that, and they would use a different name.
Those that wrote for, you know, retirementists and socialists would never use their real name.
So these were more or less noms de guerre, sort of?
Yeah, well, noms de guerre, noms de partie, something like that.
And that sort of intrigued me, and I got in touch with a
with a scholar in France, who was an American, by the way, who had really specialized in building up collections like that, you know.
He was interested in the Spanish Civil War.
He had built up a really big collection that he sold to Berkeley, and then he had, after he sold that, he started in again and built up this collection.
Well, I became, you know, pretty much interested.
Do you remember his name?
Yeah, Herbert Southworth.
Herbert Southworth.
Right.
And he was a pretty major collector, you'd say?
He's a major collector.
He, uh... He's still around?
Self-worth?
From what I heard, yeah.
He's fairly way up there, maybe close to 90 or more.
He had worked for the Library of Congress, and also left that position to work for the Ministry of Propaganda, I think, of the Spanish government.
He lived in France for a good deal of his life.
Well, I shouldn't say a good deal of his life, but I think he married a woman who was in the French underground, and I went to visit him one time.
This was really an amazing thing, you know.
Was he a wealthy man?
Huh?
Well, I would say that he had a lot of money.
But he had the means, certainly, to collect them at a level that institutions would find most interesting, I guess.
Right.
Before I went there, you know, my wife and I, we went to Paris, and we went down to see him.
And I asked him, you know, what was his telephone number?
He told me his number one.
You know, number one.
Okay, I said, when I get to this certain point, I'll call, you know.
Well, we get to this certain point, we come south from Paris, and we get off at this railroad station, and I call up this number one, you know.
And he answers, I'll be there in about 20 minutes, you know.
He comes in this old station wagon,
with cowboy boots and a cowboy hat.
I guess he's originally from Texas.
And it takes us, you know, like 20 minutes into the countryside.
And we get to his house, and it's this big, big castle.
Jeez.
It was in France.
Yeah.
The castle had belonged to, what's it, Richelieu's sister.
Oh, really?
Yeah, at some point it belonged to her.
So we got into this castle, and the only reason that he had number one, he was the only one who had a phone in that town.
So, you know, it was quite an experience, you know.
I just couldn't believe my eyes.
Did he have books in this place?
Were you just going to visit him to visit him?
Well, I went to visit him, and, you know, just shot the breeze, and
exchange information and stuff like that.
Did he kind of set you on the direction of finding things?
No, he knew that, you know, at some point we would come to him to buy some more books, you know.
Did this carry his name at Brandeis?
Was it called the Self-Worth Collection?
No, because the Women's Committee at Brandeis put up the money.
So he sold it.
He sold it.
It's not like he gave one.
Yeah, that's a different story.
But it was an important collection?
Yeah.
Yeah, it really filled in, you know, a big chunk.
And then I got to thinking, you know, what about the Americans that were involved?
You know, I knew that there were, you know, plenty of Americans, and my only contact with them had been when I was in the American Marine,
Some guys came aboard my ship, you know, sailors, said they had been in the Arab League again.
To me, okay, you were in the French Foreign Legion, same difference to me, you know.
I was completely apolitical as a kid, you know.
I had no concept of politics.
But I knew that, you know, there was a stigma attached to these people.
I went down there and I talked to them.
And, you know, after looking over a lot of books and things like that, there really is nobody here to preserve the role that the Americans played in that.
This is back in the States now?
Yeah.
And I went down and I talked to a bunch of guys, you know, and they had, you know, this I don't want to go in the book either.
They had had a bad experience with the New York Public Library.
They'd given a lot of material to the New York Public Library.
The New York Public Library microfilmed it and trashed it.
Wow.
And they had, you know, these posters from the war that were worth, I think, thousands of dollars.
And they trashed it.
That's amazing.
So that, you know, really set them off, you know.
So, you know, I said, that wouldn't happen, you know, in our collection.
We're here to preserve everything.
Just in the 70s now, would you say?
Yeah, yeah.
So, uh... So, Brandeis is the home, then.
It's the repository for the Abraham Lincoln stuff?
Right.
Whatever documents, you know, that survived, uh, are here, uh, at our, you know, library.
Uh, a lot of the documents, you know, some of them were destroyed.
By a library?
Uh, no.
No, some of them were destroyed by the records themselves.
Uh, because, you know, it's a McCarthy period.
They had to hide stuff.
We have to point out that the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, rightly or wrongly, was characterized as being... A subversive organization, yeah.
I mean, you know, there were plenty that weren't, you know, but the FBI didn't care about that.
I mean, as a scholar, that's quite irrelevant.
The point is, it has to be... Right.
documented and preserved.
I mean, you know, like one time, you know, we had... Your politics are irrelevant here, and I don't want to know them, but as you said, you're apolitical and... Right.
My objectivity was to preserve, to collect and preserve.
It's like saying... I don't make the judgments, let the historians... I mean, you can apply the very same criteria to, you know,
the Anti-Defamation League should not go out and document, you know, the activities of the Nazis or something like that, or the neo-Nazis.
Of course you have to document it.
Right.
Well, I always found, you know, that usually your enemies know more about you than you do yourself.
Okay?
They do, you know.
An example, when the first contingent of Americans went over to Spain,
They left New York City.
It was supposed to be very hush, hush, hush.
They got off the boat in Sherbird or something like that.
The next day, the French newspaper had their names.
The French right-wing newspaper.
Well, we used to say, loose lips think shit.
Well, not loose lips, but I mean, you know, the left is watching the right, and the right is watching the left.
And they're gathering information on each other.
So...
That's the way it operates, you know.
So, okay.
Then you retired from this position, I guess you said, in 89, I guess, right?
Yeah, 87, 89.
87, 89.
But you still maintained an office there at Brandeis, I guess.
Well, what happened was that another organization called the Abraham Lincoln Brigade Archives, which is chartered as an educational institution, was founded.
And they joined together with Brandeis, you know, as a mutual partnership, you know.
And I worked for them, you know.
So now recently, you know, we've started to get microphones of records that were housed in Moscow for over 60 years ago.
And they're just Western sculptors and never seen them, really, you know.
Is it interesting stuff?
Very interesting.
And are the scholars already working on it?
Well, we haven't opened it up yet because there's a lot of logistical problems to have to be worked out with the microfilms and stuff like that.
Now, who's microfilming it?
Who's shooting it for you?
Well, the Russians... And they're selling it.
They're selling it, yeah.
And they're keeping the original documents?
The original documents are being kept at Moscow.
So, let's move then over to the literary detection stuff and the stuff that you've been actively doing since you left.
Well, I enjoy hunting out pseudonyms, you know.
Writers, you know, that write under pseudonyms, especially famous ones that sometimes, you know, wrote in order to put bread on their table, they wrote, you know, these
soft-core pornography, sometimes hard-core pornography.
You know, it's a fast $500,000.
We were talking about 20th century stuff?
Yeah, 20th century.
Recent stuff?
Recent stuff.
And how do you determine... I mean, I don't want to give away my detecting methods.
Oh, I quite agree.
Yeah, you know, but I mean, I use every available source that I have at my fingertips.
Can you give me some examples of things?
I use copyright records.
Can you give me some examples of writers?
Well, I'd rather not mention their names, you know.
There's only one or two that I know that have, you know, admitted.
One is Lawrence Block, who's a mystery writer.
Donald Westlake, he's a mystery writer.
He's admitted, you know.
This is stuff they wrote for money.
How do you find this stuff?
I don't mean the actual records.
How do you find the original material?
Being a book collector at the same time, I always was interested in the stuff that falls in between the cracks that publishers don't make and are known.
paperback books for a long, long time.
Never got into, you know, books in print.
Never.
And they fell in between the cracks.
Now, you know, from just working in AAS, you know, trying to figure out stuff that, you know, publishers published a hundred years ago, you know, this stuff just disappeared because no record was kept.
And, you know, at one time, I was collecting...
the paperback books of one publisher who had been in business since 1963 to 1973.
That's 10 years of paperback publishing, maybe close to 3,000 paperbacks.
Titles.
Huh?
2,000 titles.
Well, titles and, you know, printings and stuff like that, some kind of it.
It was called Lancer.
How do you spell it?
L-A-N-C-E-R.
And when I start, you know,
digging around the records there, like, who's writing what, you know, so that people there are usually seeing them, even for good stuff, you know.
Well, what kind of stuff did they... Well, they published everything.
They were, you know, into everything.
I mean, they published hardcore, softcore, cookbooks.
Did you get most of their titles?
Did you get most of their... I got about 2,000 of them, maybe 25.
You still have them?
I still got them.
You're gonna show me some?
He'd be amazed.
You told me once on the telephone or whatever that if you don't save this stuff, it's going to wind up in the dump.
I mean, that was very bad.
I don't think so.
I'm more into the information rather than, you know, the actual book, you know.
Although, you know, the books are starting to become worth money, you know.
They're highly collectible.
I've got to show you, you know, catalogs.
where some of these things sell for more than a hardcover book.
Yeah.
So how did you get interested in this particular publisher?
I just picked one out that did a lot of publishing.
So you focused on one?
Right.
Yeah, right.
I focused on some other, you know, collectors.
They focus on another one.
I mean, in paperback book collecting, there's many, many aspects that go into it.
I mean, the covers.
The artwork on the covers fascinates some people.
Some will focus it down to artwork that have people with glasses where the image of somebody else is in the glasses.
There's no end to what guys want to collect.
There's absolutely no end.
Is this stuff you started doing after you left your job, or...?
No, I did it in between times.
Then I collected pulp magazines, too.
And where did you find these?
Did you buy these?
I buy everywhere, you know.
I used to go to conventions.
Can you name some of the magazines, some of the...name some pulp magazines for me?
Well, Operator 5.
I have some railings.
called the Octopus.
These came out in the 30s, you know, when I was growing up.
Lurid colors.
Really lurid colors.
Then there was the Spicy Detective.
Those were more lurid.
Spicy Western.
I'll show you some of that.
I'd like to see some.
Yeah.
But then there were more, you know, the regular one.
There was one called Agassi.
Oh, Agassi's more famous.
Right, yeah.
which carried a lot of fiction.
So you'd see these when you read them?
Yeah, I mean, well, I don't even know if I'd read them.
But you'd see the names of authors who clearly probably don't exist in any other, you know.
Right, in any other format.
I mean, they may have sold one story.
Some of them may have sold ten stories.
Some guys would be...
Maybe they had three or four stories under three different names in the same magazine.
You know.
Evan Hunter used to do that, he told me.
Evan Hunter.
McBain.
Yeah, McBain.
He's used a dozen different names.
Right.
And I think Dutch Leonard has done a lot of that, too.
Not too much.
I think he used his name pretty much on his own.
So you'd see some of these things, and maybe the writing's not bad.
You'd say, who is this guy, right?
But I mean...
It was.
That didn't interest me, the writing.
The writing didn't interest me.
The idea, you know, I want to know who it is.
Is he a contemporary artist?
If he isn't there, maybe he's somebody else.
So what's the motivation here?
Just knowledge, you know, just curiosity and knowledge.
Did you see the page one story in the New York Times a couple weeks ago?
They found a Alcott novel, and actually they found it about four years ago.
They just authenticated it.
But I'm amazed that they let it sit there all those years without coming out with it.
I mean, you know, well, I mean, I have my own ideas about, you know, collecting.
We go around, we collect all the office papers and everything like that.
That's piddling.
The real meat of research is in not the office papers, but in their agent's papers.
Want to expand on that?
Well, the agent is the one that sells the thing.
If this guy wrote under different names, then you would know, because he had to make a check to that guy for selling, you know, this particular thing.
And agents don't let go of their papers.
I don't know of any agent that lets go of their papers.
But that's where really some deep research could be done.
Have you ever looked, have you ever had access to any agent's papers?
No.
I mean, I think there is one that I've read about.
It's out in Oregon, you know, a guy who was an agent for, guys who wrote for Western Pulp Magazine, you know.
So they're going to find a lot of pseudonym information.
Well, to cite an example, right now, this anonymous, the guy who ever wrote Primary Colors.
Right.
The agent's, all the money's going to that agent, that agent's paying the author, and everybody's saying, who is the writer, who's the author?
Well, the agent certainly knows.
Right, absolutely.
And, of course, her files are going to tell you quite clearly who this author is.
Absolutely.
Should these files ever go into... So, you know, that's where, you know, that's where you've got to use...
every bit of acumen, you know, to find out, you know, what is available and what you can use for research.
So what do you get out of it when you find something?
Do you get a kick?
No, I write, you know, I write articles, you know.
And also, so do you write, you report your findings?
A lot of times, yeah.
And in what publications?
Well, they're mostly fan magazines, you know.
I mean,
My interests are so broad, you know.
I mean, I'm the sort of guy, you know, if I focus in, you know, on something I will become interested in, I'm going to learn all about that from A to Z. Right now, I sort of took an interest into silent film period.
Silent film?
Yeah.
Mostly in biographical material.
You write all this down?
You take notes?
I take a lot of notes down.
I do a lot of, you know, research.
I had been interested in it first from a literary, you know, viewpoint.
What movies were derived from some literary piece, you know?
And I noticed that, you know, quite a few were derived from stories that came out of the pulp magazine.
Will you be able to furnish me at some point some examples of this, just so I can use in my, you know, for some specific examples?
Well, what I'm doing now is through this, you know, I learned that, you know, a book had been published.
It's called A Necrology of Silent Film Stars.
Necrology?
Necrology.
Right.
And I looked at it and I, you know,
The guy did a fairly good job, you know, because he would list, you know, all the sources he got his information from.
And there was a lot of things that he missed.
And who's he?
Do you have his name?
Yeah.
He also publishes a... No, what's his name?
Oh, Eugene Vazona.
V-I-Z... G-Z-V-A-Z-Z-A-N-A.
Okay.
Yeah.
And...
So I've been, you know, sending him whatever information I get out.
I'm not interested in, you know, publishing something myself.
I just don't have the time to, you know, sit down and write.
What I need, you know, is really a writer.
So what you collect is information.
Right.
I'm an information buff.
And I pass it on to the most appropriate person, you know.
So who are some of the people that might be able to tell me about their
their relationships with you.
This guy Bazana might be one.
Oh, yeah.
Eugene V-A-Z-Z.
Where would I reach?
Where would I find him?
Oh, well, he's like in between New York and Pittsburgh.
I think he's getting ready to move back to Pittsburgh.
The name of his organization?
Huh?
What's the name of his organization?
Well, it's not an organization.
He puts out a... Oh.
He puts out this thing called The Silent Film Monthly.
Oh, The Silent Film Monthly.
Maybe there's a phone number here.
Mmm, no, there isn't.
The Silent... Yeah.
...Monthly.
Gene Vazana, 1407th Ave.
That says New York, Adam, but he's getting ready to move back to Pittsburgh.
One-oh.
Probably famous number.
I mean, I'll come highly recommend it from now.
Yeah.
I mean, this year was, what I had done was I traced back like one of the earliest stories about film.
Can I get a Xerox of this?
Sure, not right now.
Oh, all right.
I'll leave you in my card.
Whatever you have that you could let me.
Oh, I mean, I've published a lot of books.
I've published some books, giving students in.
Whatever happened?
No, that's just trying to sell that book.
But this was a story, you know, like anything else that I become interested in.
There was an article I read about, you know, books about Hollywood, you know, film books.
So, you know, in this article it said that, you know, the earliest story that they could find was somewhere in 1912, you know.
and it was done a thing by, you know, some English publication.
Yeah.
I know this is asking a lot, but, you know, are there maybe a dozen or so different articles that you've written over the years that, that... Oh, I think I have a, somewhere I have a Vita.
Yeah, but I mean, could I read some of them, get copies of some of them, to see some of the things that you've written?
I don't even know if I have.
Well, I do have some.
A Vita would be terrific.
And then, in addition to that, some of these articles like this one, so I can actually go with people that I work with, you know, work with, people that I have worked with at the library, you know, something like that.
A friend of mine, you know, he was a pretty good scholar in Arabic manuscripts, you know, and Arabic printing.
And, you know, I would, if I found something that, you know,
that he didn't know about, I would, you know, contact him.
He wouldn't write the article, but he would say, you know, he would, you know, whatever footnote, I would be there, you know.
How often have you written for this photo?
This is the first thing I had published.
Now, one of the things that I did have, a couple of things, well, there's another article that I'm going to write there, and that's on the origin of the word photo play.
I also like to beat out the Oxford English Dictionary in their dating of things, you know.
You like to get earlier?
Right.
Have you done that often?
Well, I did it with the word detective.
That was published in an English fan magazine, detective fan magazine.
And you found it an earlier citation?
Which one did you find?
Huh?
The word detective.
I mean, I found it like maybe
four or five years before they started it.
And did you give that to them?
I haven't given it to them yet, but I'll do that when I send them both the photo play and this one together, you know, to them.
It isn't too often that one beats them, but to beat them twice.
So you found Detective?
Yeah.
Where did you find it?
I was in the London Times.
And what were you doing in the London Times?
I was just looking for the word detective.
No, wait a minute.
You just went through the .
I didn't go through the London Times.
I went through the index of the London Times.
Went through, and you saw the word detective.
Right, and I wanted to see what that was about.
And it was actually, it was about, you know, the guy on forming the first detective service in England.
And there it was.
And what was the year on that?
I think it was 1839.
And they had it down for 1844 or something like that?
1842, you know.
But the big argument is that, you know, if, the big argument is that if Poe had known that the word existed, he would have used it for Dupin.
Okay.
So there's a significance there.
But he did not, but the word did exist when he wrote The Murder and the Remorse.
It did exist.
He just didn't use it.
Well, he didn't use it.
I mean, he used rationalization or something like that.
Well, there is a significance to it.
Right, right.
So is this what sent you to looking for the word?
Because was there some kind of... Well, it just stood in the back of my mind, you know.
Everybody was always saying this, you know.
So now when did you do this?
You just did this in an idle time, or the AAS, or... No, in an idle time.
Where, here?
Brandeis, probably.
Just going through the index.
Right.
Going through the index, saw the word detective, focused in on it.
And the word photo play is another one.
The word photo play, they have given, you know, they cite an example that it appeared in the moving picture world on such and such a date.
This is the OED we're talking about.
Right.
Yeah.
And, yeah, it did appear on that date, but it did appear earlier.
they didn't know was that it was a contest.
And the winnings of the contest were announced in this moving picture world.
And they said, this is the word that won, you know.
Now, how did you find this?
By reading in the moving picture world.
Well, what prompted you to go looking for this?
Why were you looking for photos?
Well, I, well, when I saw the, first I found, I wasn't looking for the word photo, first I saw
You might have been looking for something else.
Well, I was looking for, you know, stuff for this guy here, you know.
And then I, you know, I read the story about, you know, that this happens as a contest.
And I said, gee, when was that?
So then I went out and looked it up in the OED.
And they had it, you know, like maybe two months later, you know.
What year?
I think it was 1912, I'm not sure.
Okay.
So, that's kind of fun.
Right.
And these are both recent discoveries in your part.
Right, yeah.
So, are you going to send this to the OED?
The other one, the detective one, has been published.
Maybe when this one is published, then I'll send both of them in together.
Now, you won't forget to get me some articles.
Yeah, right.
Will you do that?
I'd love to get a copy of this and anything else you've done, not necessarily just detective stuff.
Well, I wrote one under a student.
You did?
Yeah, it was kind of a fun one.
And it was about, you know, pornographic books that were written about the Vietnam War.
So, you know, I just gathered a bunch of them together.
And where did you publish that?
I was in another paperback fan magazine.
And are you willing to come out of the closet and claim credit for that now?
Yeah, of course.
What name did you use?
I forget.
Oh, I think it was
Just in case.
Just?
J-U-S-T-A-N.
Just in case.
C-A-R-Y-C-E.
Oh.
You're pretty obviously a pseudonym.
Oh, yeah.
Just in time.
Yeah, that's great.
Okay, I'm going to turn this tape on the other side.
I think we're about to run out.